A BIRTHDAY LETTER
FOR INDIRA PRIYADARSHINI ON HER THIRTEENTH BIRTHDAY
Central Prison, Naini
October 26,1 1 930
ON your birthday you have been in the habit of receiving presents and good wishes. Good
wishes you will still have in full measure, but what present can I send you from Naini Prison ?
My presents cannot be very material or solid. They can only be of the air and of the mind and
spirit, such as a good fairy might have bestowed on you—things that even the high walls of
prison cannot stop.
You know, sweetheart, how I dislike sermonizing and doling out good advice. When I am
tempted to do this I always think of the story of a " very wise man " I once read. Perhaps one day
you will yourself read the book which contains this story. Thirteen hundred years ago there came
a great traveller from China to India in search of wisdom and knowledge. His name was Hiuen
Tsang, and over the deserts and mountains of the north he came, braving many dangers, facing
and overcoming many obstacles, so great was his thirst for knowledge. And he spent many years
in India learning himself and teaching others, especially at the great university of Nalanda, which
existed then near the city that used to be called Pataliputra and is now known as Patna. Hiuen
Tsang became very learned himself and he was given the title of " Master of the Law "—the Law
of the Buddha—and he journeyed all over India and saw and studied the people that lived in this
great country in those far-off days. Later he wrote a book of his travels, and it is this book which
contains the story that comes to my mind. It is about a man from South India who came to
Karnasuvarna, which was a city somewhere near modern Bhagalpur in Bihar; and this man, it is
written, wore round his waist copper-plates, and on his head he carried a lighted torch. Staff in
hand, with proud bearing and lofty steps, he wandered about in this strange attire. And when any
one asked him the reason for his curious get-up, he told him that his wisdom was so great that he
was afraid his belly would burst if he did not wear copper-plates round it; and because he was
moved with pity for the ignorant people round about him, who lived in darkness, he carried the
light on his head.
Well, I am quite sure that there is no danger of my ever bursting with too much wisdom and so
there is no need for me to wear copper-plates or armour. And in any event, I hope that my
1 Indira's birthday takes place, according to the Gregorian Calendar, on November 19. It was
observed, however, on October 20, according to the Samvat era.
2
wisdom, such of it as I possess, does not live in my belly. Wherever it may reside, there is plenty
of room still for more of it and there is no chance of there being no room left. If I am so limited
in wisdom, how can I pose as a wise man and distribute good advice to others? And so I have
always thought that the best way to find out what is right and what is not right, what should be
done and what should not be done, is not by giving a sermon, but by talking and discussing, and
out of discussion sometimes a little bit of the truth comes out. I have liked my talks with you and
we have discussed many things, but the world is wide and beyond our world lie other wonderful
and mysterious worlds, so none of us need ever be bored or imagine, like the very foolish and
conceited person whose story Hiuen Tsang has told us, that we have learned everything worth
learning and become very wise. And perhaps it is as well that we do not become very wise; for
the very wise, if any such there are, must sometimes feel rather sad that there is nothing more to
learn. They must miss the joy of discovery and of learning new things—the great adventure that
all of us who care to may have.
I must not therefore sermonize. But what am I to do, then ? A letter can hardly take the place of a
talk; at best it is a one-sided affair. So, if I say anything that sounds like good advice do not take
it as if it were a bad pill to swallow. Imagine that I have made a suggestion to you for you to
think over, as if we really were having a talk.
In history we read of great periods in the life of nations, of great men and women and great deeds
performed, and sometimes in our dreams and reveries we imagine ourselves back in those times
and doing brave deeds like the heroes and heroines of old. Do you remember how fascinated you
were when you first read the story of Jeanne d'Arc, and how your ambition was to be something
like her? Ordinary men and women are not usually heroic. They think of their daily bread and
butter, of their children, of their household worries and the like. But a time comes when a whole
people become full of faith for a great cause, and then even simple, ordinary men and women
become heroes, and history becomes stirring and epoch-making. Great leaders have something in
them which inspires a whole people and makes them do great deeds.
The year you were born in—1917—was one of the memorable years of history when a great
leader, with a heart full of love and sympathy for the poor and suffering, made his people write a
noble and never-to-be-forgotten chapter of history. In the very month in which you were born,
Lenin started the great Revolution which has changed the face of Russia and Siberia. And to-day
in India another great leader, also full of love for all who suffer and passionately eager to help
them, has inspired our people to great endeavour and noble sacrifice, so that they may again be
free and the starving and the poor and the oppressed may have their burdens removed from them.
Bapuji 1 lies in prison, but the magic of his message
1 Mahatma Gandhi.
3
steals into the hearts of India's millions, and men and women, and even little children, come out
of their little shells and become India's soldiers of freedom. In India to-day we are making
history, and you and I are fortunate to see this happening before our eyes and to take some part
ourselves in this great drama.
How shall we bear ourselves in this great movement? What part shall we play in it ? I cannot say
what part will fall to our lot; but, whatever it may be, let us remember that we can do nothing
which may bring discredit to our cause or dishonour to our people. If we are to be India's soldiers
we have India's honour in our keeping, and that honour is a sacred trust. Often we may be in
doubt as to what to do. It is no easy matter to decide what is right and what is not. One little test I
shall ask you to apply whenever you are in doubt. It may help you. Never do anything in secret
or anything that you would wish to hide. For the desire to hide anything means that you are
afraid, and fear is a bad thing and unworthy of you. Be brave, and all the rest follows. If you are
brave, you will not fear and will not do anything of which you are ashamed. You know that in
our great Freedom Movement, under Bapuji's leadership, there is no room for secrecy or hiding.
We have nothing to bide. We are not afraid of what we do and what we say. We work in the sun
and in the light. Even so in our private lives let us make friends with the sun and work in the
light and do nothing secretly or furtively. Privacy, of course, we may have and should have, but
that is a very different thing from secrecy. And if you do so, my dear, you will grow up a child of
the light, unafraid and serene and unruffled, whatever may happen.
I have written a very long letter to you. And yet there is so much I would like to tell you. How
can a letter contain it ?
You are fortunate, I have said, in being a witness to this great straggle for freedom that is going
on in our country. You are also very fortunate in having a very brave and wonderful little woman
for your Mummie, and if you are ever in doubt or in trouble you cannot have a better friend.
Good-bye, little one, and may you grow up into a brave soldier in India's service.
With all my love and good wishes.